you're live with BBC News us Central
Command confirmed today it had shot down
another anti-ship ballistic missile that
was flying towards the USS car from
houthi controlled Yemen the ship was
operating in the Gulf of Aiden a lot of
the focus so far has been on the US UK
response to these attacks but Reuters is
reporting that China is now getting
involved citing four Iranian sources the
report says officials from Beijing have
been asking Iranian counterparts to help
re in the h is the discussions took
place in recent meetings in Beijing and
Tran the attacks have raised the cost of
shipping and insurance for Western
companies that much we know but this is
also a route that is used widely by
ships from China who are exporting to
Europe and we all know what sort of
pressure the Chinese economy is under
right now Beijing does have some
leverage too they take 90% of the
Iranian crude that was exported last
year let's bring in there Neil Thomas
he's a fellow for Chinese politics at a
Asia Society policy Institute Center for
China analysis welcome to uh the program
um it's really interesting this because
we've been wholly focused on on the
western companies but of course a large
part of the Chinese economy is still
dependent on exports and they come on
this
route that's true uh it's certainly
something that concerns International
Trade r large not just the Western
countries there are some reports however
that the houthi rebels in Yemen are
allowing Chinese Flagg ships to sail
through those contested areas and that
the Chinese kind of commercial Navy
isn't experiencing the same type of
difficulties but still like creating
that instability creating that R of
something going wrong in a Chinese ship
or Chinese trade routs uh coming under
attack or you know seeing the danger
plus you know therefore the insurance
premiums rise more generally that's
certainly uh threat to China's interests
as well in the longer term yeah because
I mean just just on that point quickly I
mean presumably not all Chinese exports
travel on Chinese
flagships exactly so it's a problem that
is maybe less direct and less present
for Chinese importers and exporters and
the Chinese economy r large so you
haven't seen uh quite as strong or
immediate a reaction from the Chinese
government but uh perhaps it's an
indication that that is beginning to
change we've seen before in fact we saw
it last year didn't we the sort of
influence that China has over some of
its allies um they broke broke it a deal
between Saudi Arabia and Iran for
instance so so am I right that they they
do have significant leverage over
tan they do have some leverage over tan
that at least is clear I mean China buys
a huge majority of Iran's exported oil
which is obviously a Lifeline for a
regime that's under significant us and
international sanctions uh and you know
China is you know trying to increase its
own presence and diplomatic uh power
within the Middle East so China has some
leverage and some uh intention and some
interests there but at the same time
Iran also has its own uh interest and
its own kind of allies if you like
various Rebel groups and other uh
organizations in the region that it has
to look out for so it's not necessarily
a complete convergence of interests or a
complete asymmetry of power where China
can simply say something H to Iran and
that would be enough to uh stop the
houthis from threatening international
shipping so it be really interesting to
see just how much influence China has so
this will be a big test of its uh
leverage over Iran and whether this
leads to any kind of calming of the
situation if it does that's a big
diplomatic victory for China and that'll
be seen across the region and across the
world
if it doesn't make any difference well
that's going to make China question
potentially what it's getting out of its
relationship with Iran and we could even
see some type of uh economic pressure
being put on tan by Beijing yeah now
while we have we have you uh can we talk
about another issue I mean we've been
learning today that a British man who
disappeared in China five years ago uh
has been jailed on espion charges in
fact he was he was jailed two years ago
beijing's foreign Ministry confirmed
that Ian Stones a businessman around 70
years old was jailed for 5 years by a
Chinese Court in 2022 he was found
guilty of being bribed into providing
intelligence illegally said the Chinese
by external
forces the Chinese Court tried the case
strictly in accordance with the law
fully guaranteed the various legitimate
rights of in stones and arranged for the
UK side to visit and attend his trial
China is a country governed by the rule
of
law so seran Duncan Smith former
conservative leader said that he'd
raised this issue with the British
government uh over a number of years
Neil um and nothing had come out of it
until we got this news today and it just
begs the question what the right
strategy is because there are others
being held in China the policy seems to
be that they don't like the British
government don't like publicity um while
the negoti negotiations ongoing does
this suggest that actually maybe
publicity would be
better it's hard to
say definitively it all depends I think
to some extent or depends to some extent
on the nature of the charges the nature
of different cases but it's certainly
true that we've seen in the past that
the level of publicity attached to some
of these detentions of foreigners in
China has arguably contributed to their
eventual resolution not necessarily
their quick resolution if we remember
the case of the the two Michaels the two
Canadians detained after uh Huawei
executive mongan Joe was detained in
Canada uh it took them 3 years to be
released uh by Chinese authorities after
M had been released uh by the Canadian
authorities but there was a huge amount
of attention on that case and now both
the Michaels are back home in Canada so
it did lead to a resolution uh and argue
that publicity did contribute
interesting Neil Thomas thank you very
much for your thoughts this evening uh
we will see uh what comes of that
Chinese leverage over Iran but